((from the DOS Z80 emulator docs, i believe))

2.11  Using the DISCiPLE and Plus D interfaces


    For an explanation of the commands of the DISCiPLE and Plus D
    interfaces, see the relevant sections in chapter 4.

    The ROM of the DISCiPLE is supplied with the emulator, together with
    two version of the D.O.S. pre-loaded in RAM.  The ROM of the Plus D
    interface is not supplied, for copyright reasons.  The emulator will
    only emulate a Plus D interface if it can find a file PLUSDROM.BIN in
    the emulator's own directory.  If you have a Plus D yourself, you can
    transfer the ROM in the following way.  Load the operating system from
    a Plus D system diskette, and save the entire ROM, together with the
    operating system, to disk by entering SAVE d1"rom" CODE 0,16384.  Then,
    start the emulator and choose hardware mode Spectrum 48K + Disciple
    (not Plus D of course), then type LOAD d1"rom" CODE 32768.  Finally,
    press F10, X, S for Save Data block, set start address and length to
    8000 and 4000 (hexadecimal) respectively, and save the ROM under the
    name PLUSDROM.BIN.  If you re-start the emulator now, it will emulate
    the Plus D too.

    The emulation of the DISCiPLE or Plus D interfaces in turned on simply
    by choosing the right hardware mode in the F9 menu.  Changing the
    M.G.T. type will result in a Spectrum reset (unless you change with
    CTRL-ENTER), since a different ROM is switched in.

    By default, disks 1 and 2 refer to drives A: and B: respectively, but
    this can be changed in the F8 menu.



4.3  The DISCiPLE and Plus D Interfaces - Introduction


    The DISCiPLE and Plus D were two disk interfaces for the spectrum
    designed by M.G.T. (Miles Gordon Technology).  The first of these
    interfaces was the DISCiPLE, this interface consisted of a disk
    interface, microdrive network compatible interface, parallel printer
    interface, 2 joystick ports (emulating kempston, cursor, and Sinclair 1
    and 2).  The unit also had an inhibit button which disabled the
    interface hardware (except the joystick ports), and finally a snapshot
    button which when pressed stopped the computer to allow the program to
    be saved to disk or the screen to be printed.  This was made by
    Rockfort.

    The Plus D was the second of the interfaces, this was a cut-down
    version of the DISCiPLE, this interface only had a disk interface,
    parallel printer interface and a snapshot button.

    Both interfaces had a D.O.S. (Disk Operating System) which was partly
    ROM (8K) and partly RAM (8K).  When the spectrum was turned on, the ROM
    part of the D.O.S. was in control and whenever the command RUN was
    issued the ROM tries to load up the RAM part of the D.O.S. from floppy
    disk.  The advantage of this is that the D.O.S. can be upgraded without
    having to change chips over (unless of course it was a major upgrade!).
    Another advantage was that D.O.S. extensions could be incorporated or
    replace other systems (see later).

    With both interfaces, they extended the BASIC commands, but unlike the
    microdrives and several other types of drives available, the DISCiPLE
    and Plus D took up none of the spectrum's RAM, therefore it was the
    most invisible of the disk systems available, not only that, but the
    DISCiPLE and Plus D used the same type of disk drives as the BBC micro,
    therefore disk drives were both cheap and widely available, also the
    disks themselves were also standard, ie 5.25" (800K DS/DD), then later
    3.5" (800K DS/DD).

    The ROM of the DISCiPLE is supplied with the emulator, together with
    two version of the D.O.S. pre-loaded in RAM.  The ROM of the Plus D
    interface is not supplied, for copyright reasons.  The emulator will
    only emulate a Plus D interface if it can find a file PLUSDROM.BIN in
    the emulator's own directory.  If you have a Plus D yourself, you can
    transfer the ROM in the following way.  Load the operating system from
    a Plus D system diskette, and save the entire ROM, together with the
    operating system, to disk by entering SAVE d1"rom" CODE 0,16384.  Then,
    start the emulator and choose hardware mode Spectrum 48K + Disciple
    (not Plus D of course), then type LOAD d1"rom" CODE 32768.  Finally,
    press F10, X, S for Save Data block, set start address and length to
    8000 and 4000 (hexadecimal) respectively, and save the ROM under the
    name PLUSDROM.BIN.  If you re-start the emulator now, it will emulate
    the Plus D too.




4.4  The DISCiPLE and Plus D Interfaces - The basic commands


    There are several levels of commands that can be used, these range from
    the most straightforward everyday use, to the more advanced, programmer
    type commands.

    I will first explain the most common commands, so that you can quickly
    and easily access DISCiPLE and Plus D disks.  Where a 1 is used in the
    following commands 2 could be used instead.  These commands are:-

     RUN -   when no D.O.S. (system file) is loaded it will cause this to
             be loaded. Otherwise it will just run the BASIC PROGRAM.  Please
             note that with the emulator the system file is already loaded,
             therefore this command is not required, although I have
             explained it for completeness.

     CAT 1 - will display a longhand catalogue of the disk drive selected.
             The form of this catalogue is as follows:-

                    program no., program name, sectors used, file type,
                    file size

     CAT * - will display a longhand catalogue of the currently selected disk
             drive in the same form as described above.

     CAT 1! - displays a shorthand catalogue of the disk drive selected.
              This catalogue consists of a 3 column list of the filename of
              the programs.

     CAT *! - displays a shorthand catalogue of the current disk drive.

     LOAD pn - p - letter p, n - number between 1 & 80.  This is the program
               number of the file on the disk, the program number is the
               number printed before the name in the longhand catalogue.

     LOAD d1"name" - load from drive 1 the program called name

     LOAD d*"name" - load from the current drive the program called name

     LOAD d1"name" S - load an 48K snapshot from drive 1 called name

     LOAD d1"name" K - load an 128K snapshot from drive 1 called name

     LOAD d1;a$ - load from drive 1 the program whose name is held in the
                  string a$

     LOAD d*;a$ - load from the current drive the program whose name is held
                  in the string a$

     FORMAT d1 -  format the disk in drive 1




4.5  The DISCiPLE and Plus D Interfaces - More advanced commands


    In the previous section I explained enough of the commands so that you
    could get to use the floppy disks with DISCiPLE/Plus D software on. Now
    I am going to explain the commands that the more experienced user and
    those who want to do just a little bit more than just load the
    programs.

    First of all comes the simple commands of SAVE, MERGE, VERIFY and LOAD.
    All of these commands are the same as rge tape versions except that you
    have d1, d2 or d* after the LOAD, SAVE etc.  There are only two
    exceptions to this rule, the first is when you have a string for the
    filename, in this case the command becomes:-

             LOAD d1;n$ ....... etc
             LOAD d*;n$ ....... etc

    The second exception is actually an extension.  When you save a code
    block, you can actually get it to autorun when it is loaded by adding a
    third parameter to the SAVE command, e.g. if you had a code block from
    40000 to 45000 and the run address was 41023 and you wanted it to be
    called testcode to drive 1, you would save it as:-

             SAVE d1"testcode"CODE 40000,5001,41023

    Now for the extensions.

    Any sector on the disk may be loaded to any area of RAM from 16384 to
    65535-512. The sector may also be loaded into the RAM of the interface,
    however caution should be used at all times when doing this, as you may
    destroy the operating system or cause it to behave irrationally.

    The syntax of the command is:-

             LOAD @n,tr,sec,add

    Where:-

             n   = drive number, ie 1 or 2, note * may not be used!
             tr  = track number => 0->79=side 0, 128->207=side 1
             sec = sector number => 1->10 normally, may not be 0!  If you
                                    try and load a sector that is sector 0,
                                    then the operating system will crash!

    You may also save to disk in the same way, so if you wanted to write to
    Track 5, Side 0, Sector 3 with code from 32768 to 33279 to drive 1 you
    would type:-

             SAVE @1,5,3,32768

    To format a disk all you need to type is:-

             FORMAT d1       or       FORMAT d2

    This is not however as simple as it seems!  Although a disk formatted
    on the DISCiPLE/Plus D will work with the PC it does not work the other
    way round, i.e. a disk formatted on the PC with this emulator will not
    necessarily work on the DISCiPLE/Plus D. This is because of differences
    of the floppy disk controller chips.  With the PC, it puts a special
    byte at the beginning of each track to tell the controller whether the
    disk is Double Density or High Density, and the spectrum floppy disk
    controller does not understand this byte and therefore will not read
    the track!  If you find this otherwise, then please write and let us
    know about it.

    You can set some of the D.O.S. system variables using an extended POKE
    command. The syntax is:-

             POKE @address,value

    The address is the BASE address of the system variables of the
    interface concerned, the BASE address for each of the interfaces is
    different, but the address you use in the POKE command is the same.




4.6  The DISCiPLE and Plus D Interfaces - The snapshot button


    The snapshot button is a button which is used to stop the processor
    from executing instructions and making it do something else. In the
    case of the DISCiPLE/PLUS D the button can do 5 different tasks
    initially. Later on I'll discuss how the fuctions can be altered so
    that it can do other tasks. Once these tasks are carried out, the
    processor is returned to it's original state and the program continues
    from where it left off from.

    There are 5 functions that can be carried out with the initial system
    file.

    To use the button, first you must get to a point in the program that
    you want to use the button at, then press the button on the emulator
    the snapshot button is F5 (NMI).  Once you do this the program will
    stop and the border of the computer will flash, this may also be
    accompanied with a buzzing noise on the speaker.  This is to tell you
    that the snapshot button has been activated.  The following functions
    can then be carried out:-

        1   - Print screen to printer in black/white screen size
        2   - Print screen to printer in grey scale A4 size
        3   - Snapshot screen to disk in SCREEN$ format
        4   - Snapshot program to disk in 48K SNAP format
        5   - Snapshot program to disk in 128K SNAP format
      SPACE - go back to program (ie if F5 was pressed by mistake)

    The printer options will print out to EPSON compatible printers,
    however the DISCiPLE code has been changed and it is now possible to
    print to HPGL printers (e.g. Deskjet and Laserjet printers).

    The Snapshot screen and snapshot 48K are very self explanatory and easy
    to use.

    The Snapshot 128K is slightly more complicated.  Once you select this
    option the disk drive will start up then after a slight pause the
    screen display may/may not change.  The border flashes again and you
    have to press y or n depending on whether the screen display changed or
    not.  If the screen stayed the same then press n, but if the screen
    changed type y.  This is because the 128K spectrum has 2 screens, and
    there is no way for the computer to determine which is being used by
    itself, therefore it needs the user's help.  After you press y or n the
    program will be saved onto disk.

    Seeing it is possible for you to load programs into the DISCiPLE/PLUS D
    RAM area it is possible to have these interfaces carry out other tasks.
    The snapshot button code is located in RAM, so you can therefore load a
    program into this part of the RAM and as soon as you press the snapshot
    button it will execute the new program.  There is one problem however,
    which is that the program must be written in assembly language and must
    also be compiled for running in that part of RAM, also it must take
    care of what it does because the SPECTRUM ROM is not paged in,
    therefore ROM calls are not easily carried out.

    There are several different commercial programs which use the snapshot
    button to carry out different tasks, some of these are:-

                        Snapshot compressing programs
                        Debugging tools
                        Cheat finders for games
                        Programs to allow snapshots back onto tape

    The list is endless, and if you are capable of writing a machine-code
    program and have the relevant information, then you too could write
    your own programs.




5. Printing with DISCiPLE and Plus D

    If, emulating a DISCiPLE/+D and by entering POKE @11,0 the parallel
    printer output has been selected, going back to a hardware mode without
    M.G.T. interface causes problems with printing to the ZX Printer, since
    the output addresses of the "p" channel have been changed by the M.G.T.
    ROM.  Use the "b" channel of the Interface I instead.  You can reset
    the channel to the ZX Printer by entering POKE @11,1 while still
    emulating the M.G.T. interface.

    Although by default channel #3 prints to the ZX Printer, in all
    hardware modes, if a DISCiPLE/+D is emulated output to the ZX Printer
    is ignored, as these interfaces use the ZX Printer I/O ports for their
    own purposes.

